# Color in the Complete Paintings of Vincent van Gogh: A data science approach

## Abstract

Color in the Complete Paintings of Vincent van Gogh: A data science approach analyzes color features in 782 .jpg images of Vincent van Gogh’s complete paintings from a data science approach. The project aims to explore color-related changes in Van Gogh’s artistic style over time, across location-based artistic periods, and caused by the ear mutilation event. The color features are RGB dominant color, saturation, brightness, yellowness, and color diversity. The location-based artistic periods are Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Paris (1886-88), Arles (1888-89), Saint-Remy (1889-90), and Auvers-sur-Oise (1890). The methodology involves a Python program that outputs color feature calculations for each painting image and an R report that creates visualizations from the output of the Python program. Results are 9 data visualizations; with the exception of RGB dominance, all color features have 2 corresponding data visualizations—a side-by-side boxplot and a scatterplot enhanced with smooth curves and ANOVA testing. RGB dominance has a side-by-side bar chart as its 1 data visualization.

Initial predictions are as follows: Van Gogh’s paintings are more blue-dominant near career end; saturation reaches its global maximum in Paris (1886-88); brightness reaches its global maximum in Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86); yellowness is higher in the works from the last years; color diversity stays about the same throughout the career; discontinuity corresponding to ear mutilation occur for all color features. After ranking percentages, medians, interquartile ranges, and p-values from the data visualizations, it is concluded that initial predictions are partially correct. Van Gogh’s works are bluer near his end; saturation increases, but does not experience a maximum during Paris (1886-88); brightness reaches a local maximum in Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86); paintings are yellower in the later years of Van Gogh’s career; color diversity does not meaningfully fluctuate; and, at a significance level of 0.05, only brightness and yellowness experience a statistically significant discontinuity corresponding to ear mutilation.

## Introduction

Vincent van Gogh (1853-1890) was a Dutch Post-Impressionist painter known for his use of striking color as well as his tumultuous personal life (Britannica, 2023). Born in Zundert, Netherlands, Van Gogh spent several years as an art dealer and aspiring preacher across Europe before starting his art career at age 27 (Brooks, n.d.). Van Gogh’s career spanned ten years and several locations; these notably include Nuenen, Antwerp, Paris, Arles, Saint-Remy, and Auvers-sur-Oise (Brooks, n.d.). As with many other famous artists, Van Gogh struggled with mental health; this was partly because he endured financial struggles and saw little artistic success during his lifetime (Brooks, n.d.). On December 23rd, 1888, Van Gogh mutilated his ear in a fit of madness; after a stint in an asylum and some time living with a therapist, Van Gogh died on July 29th, 1889, at the age of 37 from a self-inflicted gunshot wound (Brooks, n.d.). 

Despite a lack of success during his lifetime, Van Gogh and his artwork became astoundingly popular after his death (Brooks, n.d.). Some of Van Gogh’s most famous paintings are the Sunflowers series (1888) and Starry Night (1889) (Brooks, n.d.). Although many of Van Gogh’s works are well-documented, there have not been many statistically-determined conclusions about the changes in artistic style throughout Van Gogh’s career. Color in the Complete Paintings explores one aspect of Van Gogh’s artistic style—color—from a data science approach. In particular, this project analyzes RGB dominant color, saturation, brightness, yellowness, and color diversity across hundreds of Van Gogh’s complete paintings to explore any changes throughout time, across location-based artistic periods, and caused by a significant life event (i.e., ear mutilation).

The definitions for the color metrics appearing in this project are as follows. RGB color dominance refers to the most prominent RGB color (red, green, or blue). Saturation is “a measure of the purity of a color or how sharp or dull the color appears” (“What are the Properties of Color?”, n.d.). Brightness is “the shade (darkness) or tint (lightness) of a color” (“What are the Properties of Color?”, n.d.). Yellowness is a measure of how yellow a color appears. Color diversity refers to the amount of variation in a color palette.

For this project, Van Gogh’s career is organized into 6 distinct location-based artistic periods: Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Paris (1886-88), Arles (1888-89), Saint-Remy (1889-90), and Auvers-sur-Oise (1890). The choice to categorize paintings by artistic period in such a way is inspired by vggallery, which opines that Van Gogh’s paintings should be separated based on certain locations due to developments in life and career (Brooks, n.d.). During the earliest years, Van Gogh’s works often did not use colors to their best effect; the Nuenen/Antwerp period saw Van Gogh emerge artistically by painting outdoors; in Paris, Van Gogh’s palette becomes more vibrant due to the influence of Impressionist contemporaries; in Arles, Van Gogh combines styles from his previous two periods to make what many consider to be his most creative works; in Saint-Remy, Van Gogh spends time in an asylum battling personal demons; and in Auvers-sur-Oise, Van Gogh would create his most loved works and reach what some would consider “the height of his genius” (Brooks, n.d.). 

Several predictions can be made regarding Color in the Complete Paintings. For RGB dominant color, one could theorize that Van Gogh’s palette became more blue-dominant at the end of his career as he neared suicide because the color blue is associated with depression (Hanada, 2017). Saturation should reach its global maximum during the Paris (1886-88) period due to the influence of the Impressionists (Brooks, n.d.). Brightness should reach its global maximum during the Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86) period when Van Gogh’s artistic subjects are usually outdoors (Brooks, n.d.). Yellowness should be highest in works from the last years of Van Gogh’s career, when he likely developed xanthopsia—yellow bias in vision—from his foxglove medication (Lee, 1981). Color diversity should change very little throughout Van Gogh’s career, as most of his works use many colors (Britannica, 2023). Since ear mutilation is considered to be a very dramatic event in Van Gogh’s life, another prediction is that a statistically significant discontinuity occurs corresponding to ear mutilation for saturation, brightness, yellowness, and color diversity.

## Materials and Methods

The integrated development environments PyCharm and R Studio, and the spreadsheet editor Microsoft Excel encompass all the software used for Color in the Complete Paintings. Information on Van Gogh’s complete paintings, such as .jpg image addresses, is sourced from the online database vggallery. This project can be categorized into two parts: a Python program and an HTML report written in R. The Python program is responsible for calculating measures of color features (i.e., RGB dominant color, saturation, brightness, yellowness, and color diversity) for each of the 782 .jpg images of Van Gogh paintings from vggallery. The R report is responsible for wrangling the color feature data output from the Python program and then making data visualizations about the relationships between the color features to time, location-based artistic periods, and the ear mutilation event. See the Computer Code section of Appendix for complete code.

### Python Program

Several libraries for image processing and color analysis are utilized for this project’s Python script; these include the Python Imaging Library (PIL), pandas (for data manipulation), requests (for fetching images), numpy (for numerical operations), BytesIO (for handling binary data), scikit-learn (for k-means clustering), scipy.spatial (for calculating distances), and colorgram (for color palette extraction). Information about Van Gogh’s paintings—such as painting name, origin, image address, artistic location, and creation date—are made available for analysis by loading a CSV file containing such information into a Pandas DataFrame. The color spaces RGB, HSV, and L*a*b* (aka. CIELAB) are harnessed during analysis. RGB classifies colors as sequences of 3 numbers representing red, green, and blue; HSV describes colors as sequences of 3 numbers representing hue, saturation, and value; and L*a*b* expresses colors as sequences of 3 numbers representing perceptual lightness, red-green opponents, and blue-yellow opponents (Ibraheem et al., 2012).

#### RGB Color Dominance

The calculation of RGB color dominance employs a k-means clustering algorithm that determines whether each painting image is red-dominant, green-dominant, or blue-dominant. The algorithm uses 3 clusters (representing red, green, and blue) to categorize the pixels of each painting image. Following this, the largest cluster’s label (R, G, or B)—which indicates the most dominant color amongst red, green, and blue—is output for each painting image.

#### Saturation and Brightness

To calculate the overall saturation of each painting image, the S (saturation) channel HSV values for every pixel are averaged; the output is a number from 0 to 255, with 0 representing the least saturation and 255 representing the most. The same process calculates the overall brightness, except using the V (vibrance) channel values for every pixel instead. Although HSV color sequences are usually scaled by percentage (0 to 100), this project uses the default scale in Python for HSV (0 to 255, which corresponds to 8-bit binary numbers or bytes) to maintain consistency (Ibraheem et al., 2012).

#### Yellowness

To calculate yellowness for each painting’s image, the b* channel L*a*b* values for every pixel are averaged; the output is a number from 0 to 255, with 0 representing the least yellowness and 255 representing the most. The b* channel represents a blue-yellow opponents axis, where smaller values indicate bluer colors and larger values indicate yellower colors. The L*a*b* color space is suitable for the yellowness component of this project because it aims to mimic human color vision. Although the b* axis is usually clamped from -128 to 127, this project uses the default scale in Python for L*a*b* (0 to 255, which corresponds to 8-bit binary numbers or bytes) to maintain consistency (Ibraheem et al., 2012). 

#### Color Diversity

Central to the calculation of color diversity are the colorgram and scipy-spatial libraries. A palette of 10 RGB colors is extracted from each painting image using the colorgram library. Afterward, scipy-spatial is used to find and output the average Euclidean distance between the extracted palette colors. This application of Euclidean distance refers to the length of the line between pairs of RGB colors in the 3-dimensional RGB color space (“Colour metric,” n.d.).

#### Data Storage and Export

For each painting, all calculated values for color features (RGB color dominance, saturation, brightness, yellowness, and color diversity) are stored in lists. These lists are loaded into a Pandas DataFrame, which is then saved as a CSV file to ensure the preservation of calculated values for later data analysis and visualization.

### R Report

The libraries ggplot2 (for data visualization), dplyr and tidyr (for data manipulation), and mgcv (for smooth curves) are employed by this project’s R script. The outputting CSV file from the Python program, which includes calculated color feature values and vggallery information, is loaded as a dataframe into the R environment. This dataframe has the following variables: Painting.Name, Origin, Creation.Date, Image.Address, Dominant.Color, Saturation, Brightness, Yellowness, and Color.Diversity.

#### Data Manipulation

A new variable, Artistic.Period, is created by categorizing paintings by the location from which they were painted. The mutate() function is employed to label paintings made in The Hague, Scheveningen, Nieuw-Amsterdam, or Drente as “Earliest Paintings (1881-83)”; those made in Nuenen, Antwerp, or Amsterdam as “Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86)”; those made in Paris as “Paris (1886-88)”; those made in Arles as “Arles (1888-89); those made in Saint-Remy as “Saint-Remy (1889-90)”; and those made in Auvers-sur-Oise as “Auvers-sur-Oise (1890).”
	
Another variable, Creation.Date—which initially contained just the year of each painting’s creation—is modified to be more temporally accurate with information from the Origin variable through a “convert_to_fraction” function. The Origin variable includes the part of the year in which each painting was produced by Van Gogh. The specificity of year part information varies due to inconsistencies in historical evidence; most paintings are classified by month, some by season (i.e., “Spring”), and a few by first or second half of the year. The “convert_to_fraction” function converts the textual representation of months, seasons, and year-halves into fractional values to provide a more continuous scale for creation dates. For example, Blossoming Almond Tree with Origin of “Saint-Remy: February, 1890” has the modified Creation.Date value of “1890.125” because the middle of February occurs approximately ⅛ (= 0.125) of the way through a year.

A third variable addressed during data manipulation is Ear.Mutilation, which establishes a dichotomy with the mutate() function based on Van Gogh’s ear mutilation incident on December 23, 1888 (Brooks, n.d.). The Ear.Mutilation variable categorizes the paintings into two groups, “Before” and “After,” by Creation.Date.

#### Side-by-side Bar Chart

To visualize the distribution of RGB dominance across different location-based artistic periods, a side-by-side bar chart is made (see Figure 1 in Appendix). Frequency data was converted to percentages within each period to address variation in sample size across location-based artistic periods. The resulting visualization potentially offers insights into color evolution over time by showcasing the prevalence of red (R), green (G), and blue (B) dominance.

The code for the RGB dominance side-by-side bar chart starts with applying the group_by() function on Artistic.Period and Dominant.Color to calculate the frequency of R, G, and B dominance within each location-based artistic period. Then, a “percentage_data” dataframe is made to convert the frequencies into percentages with the summarize() and mutate() functions. The ggplot() function is used to create a bar chart, with aes() specified to have the x-axis as Artistic.Period, y-axis as the percentages, and the fill color as Dominant.Color. geom_bar()—with parameter stat set to “identity” and position set to “dodge”—creates the bars with the percentages. The title of the visualization and appropriate labels for the axes are added with labs(). The colors of the bars are manually set to red, green, and blue with scale_fill_manual(), and breaks on the y-axis are formatted with scale_y_continuous(). To complete the plot, the angle and justification of the text on the x-axis are adjusted and the theme is set to minimal.

A table summarizing the side-by-side bar chart visualization—in which the exact values for the R, G, and B dominance percentages are displayed—is also made. This is done by extracting and showing values from the “percentage_data” dataframe with the select() and spread() functions.

#### Side-by-side Boxplots

The distribution of the color metrics saturation, brightness, yellowness, and color diversity across various location-based artistic periods are explored with 4 side-by-side boxplot visualizations (1 for each color metric) (see Figures 2, 4, 6, and 8 in Appendix). The side-by-side boxplots visualize differences in color features between location-based time periods by showing the minimum, first quartile, median, second quartile, maximum, and any outliers.
	
The code for the side-by-side boxplot visualizations includes the ggplot() function, with aes() setting the x-axis as Artistic.Period, the y-axis to the applicable color metric (e.g., Saturation, Brightness, Yellowness, or Color Diversity), and the fill color to Artistic.Period. Then, geom_boxplot() adds the boxplots to the plot. The title of the visualization and appropriate labels for the axes are added with labs(). Since the fill color is the same as the x-axis variable, guides() with fill set to “none” is used to remove the fill legend. To complete the plot, the breaks on the y-axis are adjusted with scale_y_continuous(), and the theme is set to minimal.

Tables summarizing the side-by-side boxplot visualizations—in which the exact values for the minimum, first quartile, median, second quartile, maximum, and interquartile range are displayed—are also made. This is done by creating a new dataframe, applying the group_by() function on Artistic.Period, and using the summarize() function in combination with min() and quantile().
	
#### Scatterplots with Smooth Curves and ANOVA

The statistical relationships between Creation.Date and the Saturation, Brightness, Yellowness, and Color Diversity color metrics are observed with 4 scatterplots (1 for each color metric) enriched with smooth curves and analysis of variance (ANOVA) testing (see Figures 3, 5, 7, and 9 in Appendix). The smooth curves place a special focus on Van Gogh’s ear mutilation, with the intention of qualitatively showing any discontinuity correlating with the event. The generalized additive model method is used for the smooth curves to visually accommodate non-linear relationships between Creation.Date and the color metrics. The p-values from ANOVA tests are also displayed to more quantitatively show whether there are statistically significant differences in the color metrics of paintings relating to the ear mutilation event. 

The code for the enriched scatterplot visualizations involves the ggplot() function with aes() setting the x-axis to Creation.Date and the y-axis to the applicable color metric (e.g., Saturation, Brightness, Yellowness, or Color Diversity). geom_point() is used to add points to the plot with the “gam” (generalized additive model) method. Following this, two instances of geom_smooth() with the “gam” method are used to add smooth curves; the second geom_smooth() is colored based on the Ear.Mutilation variable. The title of the visualization and appropriate labels for the axes are added with labs(). To style the plot, the breaks on the x and y axes are adjusted with scale_x_continuous() and scale_y_continuous() respectively.

The ANOVA tests are accomplished through the anova() function with parameters fitting a linear model (“lm” method) to the applicable color metric values (e.g., Saturation, Brightness, Yellowness, or Color Diversity) with Ear.Mutilation being the predictor variable. Using filter(), a narrow 1-year time window is specified for both “Before” and “After” groups to ensure comparable sample sizes. The ANOVA model considers the variability within this specific window around the event date. The p-values from the ANOVA testing are then extracted and displayed on the scatterplots with annotate() in blue.

## Results

The results of Color in the Complete Paintings are 9 data visualizations. RGB color dominance has 1 data visualization (a side-by-side bar chart), while saturation, brightness, yellowness, and color diversity each have 2 visualizations (a side-by-side boxplot visualization and an enriched scatterplot).

### RGB Color Dominance

For data visualization related to RGB color dominance, a side-by-side bar chart of Van Gogh’s complete paintings over time is created. This visualization can be seen in Figure 1 of the Appendix, with Table I (also in Appendix) displaying percentages shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1 and Table I show that red is the most common or tied as the most common RGB dominance for all location-based artistic periods. However, Van Gogh seems to have had a strong preference for red, green, or blue. From the lowest to the highest percentage of paintings being R (red) dominant, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Arles (1888-89), Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Paris (1886-88), Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), and Saint-Remy (1889-90); this makes Arles (1888-89) Van Gogh’s least red period and Saint-Remy (1889-90) Van Gogh’s most red. Similarly, from the lowest to the highest percentage of paintings being G (green) dominant, location-based artistic periods can be ordered like so: Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Paris (1886-88), Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Arles (1888-89), and Saint-Remy (1889-90); this makes Auvers-sur-Oise (1890) Van Gogh’s least green period and Saint-Remy Van Gogh’s most green. Finally, from the lowest to the highest percentage of paintings being B (blue) dominant, location-based artistic periods can be ordered: Saint-Remy (1889-90), Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Paris (1886-88), Arles (1888-89), and Earliest Paintings (1881-83); this makes Saint-Remy (1889-90) Van Gogh’s least blue period and Auvers-sur-Oise (1890) Van Gogh’s most blue.

### Saturation

2 data visualizations related to the saturation of Van Gogh’s complete paintings over time are created: a side-by-side boxplot and a scatterplot with smooth curves and ANOVA. These visualizations can be seen in Figures 2 and 3 of the Appendix, with Table II (also in Appendix) displaying numerical information regarding Figure 2.

Figure 2 and Table II show that the median Saturation value varies slightly across location-based artistic periods. From lowest to highest median Saturation value, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Paris (1886-88), Saint-Remy (1889-90), Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), and Arles (1888-89). An interpretation derived from these median values is that, on average, the Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86) paintings are the least saturated in color, while the Arles (1888-89) paintings are the most. The interquartile range (IQR) for Saturation, which represents the spread of the middle 50% of data, varies considerably across location-based artistic periods; there are notably many outliers in the Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86) boxplot. From lowest to highest Saturation IQR, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), Saint-Remy (1889-90), Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Arles (1888-89), Paris (1886-88), and Earliest Paintings (1881-83). An interpretation derived from these IQR values is that the Auver-sur-Oise (1890) paintings are the least varied in color saturation, while the Earliest Paintings (1881-83) works are the most. Generally, it seems that Van Gogh did not drastically change the saturation of his color palette throughout his career; however, he did narrow down the saturation of his color palette over time.

Visually, Figure 3 indicates that the saturation of Van Gogh’s paintings changes slightly over time. The blue smooth curve shows the Saturation value gradually decreasing by about 30 units from 1882 to 1884 before slowly gaining those 30 units back until 1889, from which a subtle decrease of about 10 units occurs until the end of Van Gogh’s career. This can be interpreted as Van Gogh’s color palette being at its lowest saturation around 1884 and at its highest saturation around 1889. The smooth curve colored by the variable Ear.Mutilation visually suggests that there may be a slight discontinuity in the Saturation value corresponding to the ear mutilation event. Displayed in blue text, the p-value produced by ANOVA testing is 0.0578; thus, at a significance level of 0.05, the observed discontinuity in the Saturation value is not statistically significant.

### Brightness

2 data visualizations related to the brightness of Van Gogh’s complete paintings over time are created: a side-by-side boxplot and a scatterplot with smooth curves and ANOVA. These visualizations can be seen in Figures 4 and 5 of the Appendix, with Table III (also in Appendix) displaying numerical information regarding Figure 4.

Figure 4 and Table III show that the median Brightness value varies considerably across location-based artistic periods. From lowest to highest median Brightness value, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Paris (1886-88), Saint-Remy (1889-90), Arles (1888-89), and Auvers-sur-Oise (1890). An interpretation derived from these median values is that, on average, the Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86) paintings are the least bright in color, while the Auvers-sur-Oise (1890) paintings are the most. The IQR for Brightness also varies considerably across location-based artistic periods. From lowest to highest Brightness IQR, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), Saint-Remy (1889-90), Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Arles (1888-89), Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), and Paris (1886-88). An interpretation derived from these IQR values is that the Auvers-sur-Oise (1890) paintings are the least varied in color brightness, while the Paris (1886-88) works are the most. Generally, it seems that the brightness of Van Gogh’s palette changed drastically during the first half of his career but was more consistent in the latter half.

Visually, Figure 5 indicates that the brightness of Van Gogh’s paintings changes considerably over time. The blue smooth curve shows the Brightness value subtly increasing about 15 units from 1882 to 1883, from which there is a quick drop of approximately 30 units until 1885; then a dramatic increase of roughly 60 units happens until 1888, from which a slight trough occurs right before Van Gogh’s death. This can be interpreted as Van Gogh’s color palette being at its lowest brightness around 1885 and at its highest brightness around 1888. The smooth curve colored by Ear.Mutilation visually suggests that there may be a discontinuity in the Brightness value corresponding to the ear mutilation event. Displayed in blue text, the p-value produced by ANOVA testing is 0.001; thus, at a significance level of 0.05, the observed discontinuity in the Brightness value is statistically significant.

### Yellowness

2 data visualizations related to the yellowness of Van Gogh’s complete paintings over time are created: a side-by-side boxplot and a scatterplot with smooth curves and ANOVA. These visualizations can be seen in Figures 6 and 7 of the Appendix, with Table IV (also in Appendix) displaying numerical information regarding Figure 6.

Figure 6 and Table IV show that the median Yellowness value varies slightly across location-based artistic periods. From lowest to highest median Yellowness value, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Paris (1886-88), Saint-Remy (1889-90), Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), Arles (1888-89). An interpretation derived from these median values is that, on average, the Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86) paintings are the least yellow in color, while the Arles (1888-89) paintings are the most. The IQR for Yellowness varies very little across location-based artistic periods; there are notably many outliers in the Auvers-sur-Oise (1890) boxplot. From lowest to highest Yellowness IQR, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Arles (1888-89), Paris (1886-88), Saint-Remy (1889-90), and Earliest Paintings (1881-83). An interpretation derived from these IQR values is that the Auvers-sur-Oise (1890) paintings are the least varied in yellowness, while the Earliest Paintings (1881-83) works are the most. Generally, it seems that Van Gogh did not drastically change the yellowness of his color palette throughout his career.

Visually, Figure 7 indicates that the yellowness of Van Gogh’s paintings changes slightly over time. The blue smooth curve shows the Yellowness value gradually decreasing by about 10 units from 1882 to 1885, from which there is a slow recovery of those 10 units until around 1888; afterward, the Yellowness value stays almost constant. This can be interpreted as Van Gogh’s color palette being the least yellow around 1885 and most yellow around 1888. The smooth curve colored by Ear.Mutilation visually suggests that there may be a discontinuity in the Yellowness value corresponding to the ear mutilation event. Displayed in blue text, the p-value produced by ANOVA testing is 0.0263; thus, at a significance level of 0.05, the observed discontinuity in the Yellowness value is statistically significant.

### Color Diversity

2 data visualizations related to the color diversity of Van Gogh’s complete paintings over time are created: a side-by-side boxplot and a scatterplot with smooth curves and ANOVA. These visualizations can be seen in Figures 8 and 9 of the Appendix, with Table V displaying numerical information regarding Figure 8 (also in Appendix).

Figure 8 and Table V show that the median Color Diversity value varies very slightly across location-based artistic periods. From lowest to highest median Color Diversity value, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86), Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Arles (1888-89), Saint-Remy (1889-90), Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), and Paris (1886-88). An interpretation derived from these median values is that, on average, the Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86) paintings are the least diverse in color, while the Paris (1886-88) paintings are the most. The IQR for Color Diversity varies slightly across location-based artistic periods; there are notably many outliers in the Earliest Paintings (1881-83) boxplot. From lowest to highest Color Diversity IQR, location-based artistic periods can be ordered as follows: Earliest Paintings (1881-83), Auvers-sur-Oise (1890), Arles (1888-89), Saint-Remy (1889-90), Paris (1886-88), and Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86). An interpretation derived from these IQR values is that the Earliest Paintings (1881-83) works are the least varied in color diversity, while the Nuenen/Antwerp pieces are the most. Generally, it seems that Van Gogh did not drastically change the diversity of his color palette throughout his career.

Visually, Figure 9 indicates that the color diversity of Van Gogh’s paintings changes very slightly over time. The blue smooth curve shows the Color.Diversity value gradually decreasing by about 20 units from 1882 to 1885, from which there is a slow increase of 5 units until around 1888; afterward, the Color.Diversity value stays almost constant. This can be interpreted as Van Gogh’s color palette being the least diverse around 1885 and the most diverse around 1882. The smooth curve colored by Ear.Mutilation visually suggests that there is no discontinuity in the Color.Diversity value corresponding to the ear mutilation event. Displayed in blue text, the p-value produced by ANOVA testing is 0.5158; thus, at a significance level of 0.05, any discontinuity in the Color.Diversity value is not statistically significant.

### Discussion

From the results of Color in the Complete Paintings, it can be observed that the predictions mentioned in the Introduction section are partially correct. The Auvers-sur-Oise (1890) artistic period, which was during the last year of Van Gogh’s life and career, saw the largest percentage of blue-dominant paintings; thus, the prediction that Van Gogh used a bluer color palette as he neared suicide is correct. Note that this only suggests a correlation between blue dominance and Van Gogh’s depression, not causation. Saturation interestingly did not reach its global maximum during the Paris (1886-88) period, although it was a time of gradual increase in saturation; whether this increase is caused by the influence of Parisian Impressionists cannot be determined by this project’s purely statistical results. The Nuenen/Antwerp (1883-86) period sees a local maximum in Brightness rather than the global one predicted; this indicates a correlation between brightness and outdoor artistic subject matter but not causation. Yellowness is highest in works made in the last three years of Van Gogh’s career, making the prediction that Van Gogh used a yellower color palette while likely developing xanthopsia correct; whether this change in yellowness is caused by xanthopsia is not determined. Color diversity does not seem to meaningfully fluctuate at any particular creation date or artistic period, making the prediction that color diversity stays about the same throughout Van Gogh’s career correct. Choosing a significance level of 0.05 leads to the conclusion that statistically significant discontinuities corresponding to ear mutilation occur for brightness and yellowness; such discontinuities are not statistically significant for saturation and color diversity.

Several limitations appear throughout Color in the Complete Paintings. The Python k-means clustering algorithm for calculating RGB Color Dominance assumes that—because 3 clusters are used to group RGB pixels—the first cluster corresponds to red dominance, the second corresponds to green dominance, and the third corresponds to blue dominance. This assumption may not hold for every painting’s image. Another limitation relates to the statistical significance of discontinuities found through ANOVA testing. Whether each p-value suggests statistical significance depends on a chosen significance level (this project uses 0.05), which can be debatable. A more generalizable conclusion would involve comparing the p-values to each other and ranking applicable color metrics by statistical significance. From the lowest to the highest statistical significance (for discontinuity corresponding to ear mutilation), applicable color metrics can be ordered as follows: color diversity, saturation, yellowness, and brightness.

### Acknowledgments

	Many thanks to my faculty supervisor, Associate Professor Antonio Linero, for meeting with me on a biweekly basis for academic discussion and status updates.
 
### Literature Cited

Britannica, T. Editors of Encyclopaedia (2023, November 23). Vincent van Gogh. Encyclopedia 
Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/biography/Vincent-van-Gogh.

Brooks, D. (n.d.). The Vincent van Gogh gallery. http://www.vggallery.com/index.html.
Colour metric. (n.d.). https://www.compuphase.com/cmetric.htm.

Hanada, M. (2018). Correspondence analysis of color–emotion associations. Color Research & 
Application, 43(2), 224–237. https://doi.org/10.1002/col.22171.

Ibraheem, N. A., Hasan, M. M., Khan, R. Z., & Mishra, P. K. (2012). Understanding color 
models: a review. ARPN Journal of science and technology, 2(3), 265-275.

Lee, T. C. (1981). Van gogh’s vision: Digitalis intoxication? JAMA, 245(7), 727–729. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1981.03310320049025.

What are the properties of color? (n.d.). Pantone. 
https://www.pantone.com/articles/color-fundamentals/what-are-the-properties-of-color.
